title: DE/compositor development notes - introduction
date: 2023-07-05
----
This blog post initiates a series on implementation of a [new desktop environment](/new-de/).

The posts are not intended as comprehensvie documentation of the topics.
They serve as working notes for me to ensure my understanding of the topics.

I limit the scope of the posts in the following ways:
- I only describe Linux. I am not currently focused on portability.
- I only describe _modern_ Linux. Historical information is relegated to footnotes,
  and I won't delve into explaining how outdated interfaces function if they have
  been completely replaced by modern ones.
- I only describe the desktop/laptop environment. The DE I am working on does not
  attempt to support embedded, handhelds, and other environments.
- I focus on describing modern hardware. The primary platform for the DE is Apple M1/M2,
  and the secondary platform is a modern PC with Intel graphics card. I won't cover
  big-endian processors, exotic buses, or compositing without a GPU.

The posts will be updated as I expand and correct them. I welcome corrections,
please send them to [my e-mail](mailto:dottedmag@dottedmag.net).

1. [Linux DRM devices](/blog/01-de-drm/)
1. [Linux VT](/blog/02-de-vt/)
1. [DRM operations - capabilities](/blog/03-de-drm-ioctl/)
1. [DRM operations - resource sharing](/blog/04-de-drm-ioctl-2/)
1. [DRM pipeline](/blog/05-de-drm-pipeline/)
1. [DRM framebuffers](/blog/06-de-drm-framebuffer/)
1. [DRM pixel formats and modifiers](/blog/07-de-drm-pixel-formats/)
1. [DRM properties and atomic interface](/blog/08-de-drm-atomic/)

